Exome seq data demo (#10)
Sage-Bionetworks/nf-hackathon-2019: data_demos/NF_hackathon_exomeseq_datademo.Rmd

---
title: "Genomic Variants: Introduction to exomeSeq data"
author: Jineta Banerjee
date: '`r format(Sys.time(), "%d %B, %Y")`'
output: 
  html_document:
    code_folding: hide
    toc: true
    number_sections: true
    toc_float:
      collapsed: false
      smooth_scroll: false
    fig_width: 7
    fig_height: 6
    fig_caption: true
    df_print: paged 
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
```

# Getting Started

> This document aims to guide challenge particpants who have limited exposure to Synapse as a platform and clinical/biological data, through exploration and analysis of the available exomeSeq datasets. The available dataset has been carefully curated to include genomic variant (exomeSeq) data from normal and four different tumor types from four different study initiatives into a single platform (a harmonized dataset). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document aims to guide hackathon participants who have limited exposure to Synapse as a platform and clinical/biological data, through exploration and analysis of the available exomeSeq datasets. The available dataset has been carefully curated to include genomic variant (exomeSeq) data from normal and four different tumor types from four different study initiatives into a single platform (a harmonized dataset). 
```

The scope of this document is to inform participants:

* how to navigate the Synapse environment to access and work with the data files
* display the key features of the genomic variant (exomeSeq) dataset 
* introduce few general analyses steps of the data and their interpretation

At the end of this document, the participants will be able to download the data and understand various intricacies that exist in this given dataset. We encourage participants to visualize the dataset by faceting on different variables to get an accurate understanding of the dataset. 

## Loading Analytical Packages

Lets first load the R packages we need to query, download, and analyze the data that is stored on Synapse.
```{r lib_synapser, eval=TRUE, results='show', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, include=TRUE}

library(synapser)
library(synapserutils)
library(BiocManager)
library(gProfileR)
library(tidyverse)
library(DT)
library(maftools)
library(here)
library(ggfortify)
library(stringr)
library(reshape2)

```

## Logging in to Synapse

> Please download your R Synapse client: [R client](https://r-docs.synapse.org/) and refer to the necessary docs [synapser docs](https://r-docs.synapse.org/articles/synapser.html#connecting-to-synapse) to successfully log in to synapse and start using its various analytical tools.

Reviewer 2: we should include this in 0-setup.R and py instead. 
The client will already be installed for anyone using the docker images, also.

Author: Agreed. Will remove this from the Rmd.

```{r login_to_synapse, eval=TRUE, results='hide', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

## The login credentials have been stored in .synapseConfig file in the home dir. If you dont have this setup, please make the file before trying to login.
synLogin()

```

## Accessing or downloading data from Synapse

> You can look up the SynID of the required file and download it using the __synGet__ command of SynapseR. Load the required csv file by adding __$path__ to the accessed file.

Reviewer 2: library is just called `synapser` - no caps. 

Can you add a one sentence description/reminder of what data this synapse entity contains?

```{r load data, eval=TRUE, results='show', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

#here() # check working directory

> entity <- synGet("syn19955828")  # download file 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entity <- synGet("syn19955828")  # download file with associated metadata
```

exome_data <- read_csv(entity$path) # read csv file 

```
# Exploring the data files

## Structure of the file

```{r explore data, eval=TRUE, results='show', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, include=TRUE}

##Inspect the file
print("Dimensions of the file:")
dim(exome_data)

print("Contents of the file:")
head(exome_data)

```

The following table contains descriptions of some of the metadata variables included in the data file:

> Var | Description

Reviewer 2: this is great!

 _Chromosome_ | Chromosome number (range 1-22 and X,Y),  Chr M == mitochondrial genome (absent in exomes with NCBI Build == hg19)
 _species_  |  the source of the specimen
 _age_  |  the age of the patient 
 _sex_  |  the sex of the patient
 _tumorType_  |  the the type of tumor, can be one of 7 different diagnoses
 _isCellLine_  |  indicates whether the origin tissue was a cell line or a patient
 _study_  |  the specific initiative/consortia that the study was a part of

For more information regarding the various columns in the dataset please visit here: https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/File_Formats/MAF_Format/#vep

## Metadata 

The metadata in a healthcare study includes descriptions of the specimens, and the details of the studies they originated from. We can explore the metadata by visualizing various aspects of it to get a sense of the data contained within our dataset and put it in context of the disease and patients.

For example, we can visualize the data distribution according to sex.

```{r explore Metadata1, eval=TRUE, results='show', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, include=TRUE}

#Plot Metadata
exome_data %>% group_by(Tumor_Sample_Barcode) %>%
ggplot(aes(x=sex))+

>     geom_bar(aes(x=sex,fill=as.factor(tumorType)),position='dodge')+

Reviewer 2: i think this should work the same without `as.factor`, assuming the tumorType is being read in by read_csv as a character column...but maybe I am missing something.

    ggtitle('Exome-seq sample distribution')
```

> We can also look at the different types of mutations observed for various genes according to the tumor type

Reviewer 2: missing period

```{r explore Metadata2, eval=TRUE, results='show', message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, include=TRUE}
#Plot genes with metadata
analyzeMetdataWithGenes<-function(datafile,prefix, gene_a, ...){
  #look at some marker genes using normalized zScore
  ggplot(subset(datafile,Hugo_Symbol%in%c(gene_a, ...)))+
    geom_jitter(aes(x=Hugo_Symbol, y=Variant_Classification, shape=study,col=tumorType), width =0.1, size=2, height = 0.1)+
    ggtitle(paste(prefix,'Variant types in selected genes', sep = '::'))
}

> analyzeMetdataWithGenes(exome_data, "NF_hackathon", "NF1", "NF2", "GFAP", "ASTE1")

Reviewer 2: can you add some simple context for why you picked these genes (targeted at a non biological crowd)

select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(isDEL = as.numeric(select_df$Variant_Type == "DEL")) 
select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(isDNP = as.numeric(select_df$Variant_Type == "DNP"))  
select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(isINS = as.numeric(select_df$Variant_Type == "INS")) 
select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(isONP = as.numeric(select_df$Variant_Type == "ONP"))  
select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(isTNP = as.numeric(select_df$Variant_Type == "TNP")) 
select_df <- select_df %>% mutate(totHits = rowSums(select_df[,c(33:38)]))

# Filter out well known common variants to look for rare mutations, and select mutations with annotated "HIGH" impact on proteins
impact_df <- select_df[(select_df$IMPACT == "HIGH" & select_df$FILTER != "common_variant"),]
```

We used the number of mutational events (_hits_) to the genes as a scoring metric for each gene to do our principal component analysis. Since some genomic variants can be quite common and many of them are well tolerated, we filtered out all known common_variants in the genes and selected for the ones with high impact on proteins to strengthen the signal for PCA. 

> We notice that the PCA seems to identify two different clusters in the data based on this metric, and also identifies one sample as an outlier. However, even with our efforts to select relevant mutations, the first principal component explains only 13% of the variance in the data. We encourage the participants to explore other variables present in the dataset and combinations thereof to find more significant sources of variance within the data. The later panels show the different types of mutations observed in some of the genes that constitute the first and second principal components of the analysis.

Reviewer 2: suggest create a new chunk for the PC loading summary plots, with the description after the first PCA plot
